Determining a Treatment Setting
In determining a treatment setting, considerations for individuals with schizophrenia are similar to
those for individuals with other diagnoses. Thus, in general, patients should be cared for in the least
restrictive setting that is likely to be safe and to allow for effective treatment. If inpatient care is
deemed essential, efforts should be made to hospitalize patients voluntarily. However, if hospitalization is deemed essential but is not accepted voluntarily by the patient, state or jurisdictional requirements for involuntary hospitalization should be followed. Indications for hospitalization
usually include the patient posing a serious threat of harm to self or others or being unable to care
for himself or herself and needing constant supervision or support as a result. Other possible indications for hospitalization include psychiatric or other medical problems that make outpatient
treatment unsafe or ineffective or new onset of psychosis that warrants initial inpatient stabilization
to promote reduction of acute symptoms and permit engagement in treatment.
For individuals with schizophrenia and other significant health issues, determination of a treatment setting will require weighing the pluses and minuses of possible settings to identify the optimal location for care. For example, individuals who require significant medical or surgical
interventions or monitoring that are not typically available on a psychiatric inpatient service will
likely be better served on a general hospital unit or in an intensive care setting with input from consultation-liaison psychiatrists. Considerable efforts may be needed to help staff who are unfamiliar
with psychotic disorders engage with the patient (Freudenreich et al. 2019). In other circumstances,
management of the patient on an inpatient psychiatric service in collaboration with consultants of
other medical specialties will be optimal.
Less restrictive settings may be indicated when a patient does not meet criteria for inpatient
treatment but requires more monitoring or assistance than is available in routine outpatient care.
Such settings and programs may include ACT (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 2008), assisted outpatient treatment, intensive outpatient treatment, partial hospitalization, and day hospitalization.