Involuntary Treatment Considerations
Under some circumstances, individuals may not wish to participate in treatment or take medications, even if they have severe symptoms. In states where psychiatric advance directives are available, patients may be able to state their preferences about treatment choices while they have capacity in the event of future decompensation and an inability to participate in decision-making.
Even in the absence of a psychiatric advance directive, patients can often be helped to accept pharmacological treatment over time and with psychotherapeutic interactions that are aimed toward
identifying subjectively distressing symptoms that have previously responded to treatment. Family members and other persons of support can also be helpful in encouraging the patient to engage
in treatment.
Prevailing state laws will determine other steps to take if an individual lacks capacity but requires treatment. Some states have processes by which pharmacological treatment may be administered involuntarily, whereas in other states a judicial hearing may be needed to obtain permission
to treat a patient who lacks capacity.
For a small subgroup of patients with repeated relapses, rehospitalizations, or even reincarcerations associated with nonadherence or impairments in insight, involuntary outpatient commitment
may warrant inclusion in the treatment plan to improve adherence, prevent psychiatric deterioration, enhance outcomes, and promote recovery (American Psychiatric Association 2015; Gaynes et
al. 2015; Harris et al. 2019; Segal et al. 2017a, 2017b; Swartz et al. 2017). Involuntary outpatient commitment (which also may be referred to as assisted outpatient treatment, mandated community
treatment, outpatient court-ordered treatment, or a community treatment order) is increasingly
available but varies among countries (Burns et al. 2013; Harris et al. 2019) and jurisdictions within
the United States (Meldrum et al. 2016) in its criteria and implementation. Effective implementation
requires adequate resources and individualized treatment planning (American Psychiatric Association 2015) if psychiatric (Gaynes et al. 2015; Harris et al. 2019; Segal et al. 2017a; Swartz et al. 2017)
and physical health (Segal et al. 2017b) benefits are to be realized. As with any form of involuntary
treatment, decisions about involuntary outpatient commitment require balancing ethical considerations related to patient autonomy and self-determination with considerations about the individual’s best interest.