the presence of physical health conditions that may be affected by medication side effects; and other medication-related factors such as available formulations, potential for drug-drug interactions, receptor binding profiles, and pharmacokinetic considerations 

Chlorpromazine: IM dosing is typically 25–50 mg per upper outer quadrant of gluteal with 200 mg/day maximum. Do not inject subcutaneously. Use much lower IM doses than oral doses because oral first-pass metabolism is significant.
Fluphenazine: Short-acting IM dose is 33%–50% of oral dose. Dilute oral concentrate immediately before use to ensure palatability and stability. 
Haloperidol: 2–5 mg IM can be given every 4–8 hours. 
Loxapine: Oral inhalation formulation (Adasuve) to treat agitation requires REMS program because of potential for bronchospasm. 
Molindone 
Perphenazine: CYP2D6poor metabolizers will have higher blood concentrations. 
Pimozide: Pimozide does not have an FDA indication for schizophrenia but is sometimes used off-label or to treat delusional disorders such as delusional parasitosis. Avoid concomitant use of CYP1A2 or CYP3A4 inducers or inhibitors. Perform CYP2D6 genotyping if doses greater than 4 mg/ day are used. In poor CYP2D6 metabolizers, do not give more than 4 mg/day and do not increase dose earlier than 14 days. 
Thioridazine: Use is associated with dose-related QTc prolongation. Baseline ECG and serum potassium level are recommended. Avoid use if QTc interval is >450 msec or with concomitant use of drugs that prolong the QTc interval or inhibit CYP2D6. Reserve use for patients who do not show an acceptable response to adequate courses of treatment with other antipsychotic drugs.
Thiothixene: Smoking may reduce levels via CYP1A2 induction. 
Trifluoperazine: Smoking may reduce levels via CYP1A2 induction. 
Aripiprazole: Adjust dose if a poor CYP2D6 metabolizer or with concomitant use of a CYP3A4 inhibitor, CYP3A4 inducer, or CYP2D6 inhibitor. Tablet and oral solution may be interchanged on a mg-per-mg basis, up to 25 mg. Doses using 30 mg tablets should be exchanged for 25 mg oral solution. Orally disintegrating tablets are bioequivalent to the immediate-release tablets. Mycite tablet cannot be split or crushed.
Asenapine: Consider dose adjustment in smokers and with concomitant use of CYP1A2 inhibitors. Do not split, crush, or swallow. Place under tongue and allow to dissolve completely. Do not eat or drink for 10 minutes after administration to ensure absorption. 
Brexpiprazole: Adjust dose if a poor CYP2D6 metabolizer or with concomitant use of moderate/strong CYP2D6 inhibitors, strong CYP3A4 inhibitors, or strong CYP3A4 inducers. 
Cariprazine: Adjust dose with concomitant use of a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor or inducer. 
Clozapine: Prescribers must complete clozapine REMS education and ollow requirements for a baseline CBC and  ANC and for ANC monitoring before and during treatment. When initiating clozapine, increase in 25–50 mg/day increments for 2 weeks, then further increments not exceeding 100 mg up to twice weekly. For treatment interruptions of 2 or more days, restart at 12.5 mg once or twice daily. Retitration can occur more rapidly than with initial treatment. With treatment interruptions of more than 30 days, recommendations for initial titration and monitoring frequency should be followed. Adjust dose with concomitant use of strong CYP1A2 inhibitors and with strong CYP3A4 inducers. Smoking reduces clozapine levels via CYP1A2 induction. Clozapine levels can be informative in making dose adjustments.
Iloperidone: Titrate slowly (no more than 4 mg/day increase in dose). Follow initial titration approach if more than 3-day gap in treatment. Adjust dose with concomitant use of strong CYP2D6 or CYP3A4 inhibitors and reduce dose by 50% in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. 
Lurasidone: Administer with food (≥350 calories). Adjust dose for concomitant use of moderate to strong CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers. 
Olanzapine: Short-acting IM formulation is used primarily for agitation, with usual dose of 2.5–10 mg IM and maximum dosage of 30 mg/day. Administer IM slowly, deep into muscle. Do not use subcutaneously. Concomitant use of IM olanzapine with parenteral benzodiazepines is not recommended because of potential for excessive sedation and cardiorespiratory depression. Smokers may require a 30% greater daily dose than nonsmokers because of CYP1A2 induction. Women may need lower daily doses. Approximately 40% of an oral dose is removed by first-pass metabolism as compared with IM dose. IM elimination half-life is ~1.5 times greater in the elderly. Oral dissolving tablet dissolves rapidly in saliva and may be swallowed with or without liquid. Olanzapine may be administered with or without food/meals.
Paliperidone: If exceeding 6 mg daily, increases of 3 mg/day are recommended at intervals of more than 5 days, up to a maximum of 12 mg/day. Uses OROS; do not split or crush tablet. Use of extended-release tablet is not recommended with preexisting severe gastrointestinal narrowing disorders. Tablet shell is expelled in the stool. 
Quetiapine: Dosage is once daily for extended release and divided dosing for immediate release. Do not split or crush extended-release tablets. Immediaterelease tablets are marginally affected by food, whereas extended-release tablets are significantly affectedby a high-fat meal. Give extended-release tablets without food or with <300 calories. Retitrate for gap in treatment of more than 1 week. Adjust dose for concomitant use of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers. 
Risperidone: Use lower initial doses and slower titration rates with CrCl <30 mL/min or severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class C). Fraction of free risperidone is increased with hepatic impairment, and the initial starting dose is 0.5 mg twice daily, which may be increased in increments of 0.5 mg or less, administered twice daily. With renal or hepatic impairment, increase in intervals of 1 week or more for doses >1.5 mg twice daily.Adjust dose with concomitant use of inducers or inhibitors of CYP2D6. Check labeling for compatible liquids with oral solution. Do not split or crush oraldisintegrating tablets. Inform patients with phenylketonuria that oral disintegrating tablets contain phenylalanine. 
Ziprasidone: Give capsules with >500 calories of food. No data suggest improved efficacy at higher doses. See labeling for reconstitution and storage of IM formulation. Short-acting IM formulation is used primarily for agitation, with usual dosage of 20 mg/day and maximum dosage of 40 mg/day. 



Available Drug Formulations Medication choice may be influenced by available formulations of specific medications, such as oral concentrates or rapidly dissolving tablets for patients who have difficulty swallowing pills or who are ambivalent about medications and inconsistent in swallowing them. Use of ingestible sensors with associated monitoring technology may assist in evaluating ingestion, although the FDA notes that improvements in adherence have not yet been shown (U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2017). LAI formulations may be preferred by some patients (Heres et al. 2007; Patel et al. 2009; Walburn et al. 2001) and may be particularly useful for patients with a history of poor or uncertain adherence (see Statement 10). Short-acting parenteral formulations of antipsychotic agents are available for short-term use in individuals who are unable to take oral medications or for emergency administration in acutely agitated patients. Drug-Drug Interactions and Metabolism Careful attention must be paid to the potential for interactions of antipsychotic agents with other prescribed medications. For example, when multiple medications are prescribed, side effects (e.g., sedation, anticholinergic effects) can be additive. In addition, drug interactions can influence the amount of free drug in the blood that is available to act at receptors. Because most antipsychotic medications are highly bound to plasma proteins, the addition of other protein-bound medications will displace drug molecules from proteins, resulting in a greater proportion of unbound drug in the blood. Another common cause of drug-drug interactions relates to interactions at metabolic enzymes such as cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, UDP-glucuronosyltransferases, and flavin-containing monooxygenases (Ouzzine et al. 2014; Phillips and Shephard 2017; Rowland et al. 2013; Zanger and Schwab 2013). In particular, hepatic metabolism of antipsychotic medications via CYP enzymes has been widely studied (see Lexicomp 2019; Micromedex 2019). Medications may compete with each other for the same CYP enzyme, or they may induce or inhibit the activity of CYP enzymes, altering levels of drugs that are metabolized through that route. For antipsychotic medications that have active metabolites, shifts in CYP enzyme activity can influence the relative amounts of the active metabolite. Consequently, when a patient is taking multiple medications, it is useful to check for possible drug-drug interactions using electronic drug interaction software (e.g., Web-based software, drug interaction checking embedded in electronic health record software). In addition to drug-drug interactions, a number of other factors can influence CYP enzymes and thereby affect antipsychotic medication levels in blood. For example, smoking tobacco or marijuana induces CYP1A2, resulting in a corresponding reduction of levels of drugs that are metabolized through that enzyme, including clozapine and olanzapine (Anderson and Chan 2016; Kroon 2007; Scherf-Clavel et al. 2019). Conversely, with cessation of smoking (either intentionally or with admission to a smoke-free facility), there will be corresponding increases in the levels of drugs metabolized via CYP1A2. These shifts in blood levels can be quite significant and contribute to shifts in medication effectiveness or toxicity. Several of the main phytocannabinoids in marijuana (e.g., Δ9 - tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol) are metabolized via CYP3A4, and cannabidiol may also inhibit CYP2C19 (Anderson and Chan 2016). Furthermore, levels of antipsychotic medications, the relative proportions of active metabolites, and other pharmacokinetic properties such as medication or active metabolite half-life can be influenced by genetic differences in metabolic enzyme activity. Polymorphisms of CYP2D6 have been subjected to the most study (Eum et al. 2016; Zhou 2009), show substantial variation in their occurrence in the population by ethnicity (Bertilsson 2007; Gaedigk et al. 2017), and are likely to have the greatest potential for impact on antipsychotic medication metabolism. Polymorphisms of the ATPbinding cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1) gene, which affects P-glycoprotein membrane transport, may influence brain concentrations of drugs, including antipsychotic agents (Moons et al. 2011). Although the applicability of gene polymorphism testing to the clinical choice of an antipsychotic medication is still being explored (Bousman and Dunlop 2018; Koopmans et al. 2018; Lagishetty et al. 2016), the FDA has incorporated testing for CYP2D6 polymorphisms into its labeling recommendations for dosing of pimozide on the basis of the increased risk of electrocardiographic changes in poor metabolizers at doses higher than 4 mg/day (0.05 mg/kg/day in children) (Rogers et al. 2012; U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2011b). In addition, product labeling for a number of other antipsychotic medications refers to a need for dose adjustments based on metabolizer status (U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2019). Additional information on the clinical pharmacogenomics of antipsychotic medications is available through the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (https://cpicpgx.org; Relling and Klein 2011), the Pharmacogene Variation Consortium (www.pharmvar.org; Gaedigk et al. 2018), and the Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase (www.pharmgkb.org; Whirl-Carrillo et al. 2012). Pharmacokinetic Properties The absorption of some antipsychotic medications is affected by the presence of food in the stomach (see Statement 4, Tables 3 and 4). Some individuals may have difficulty in adhering to appropriate meal size or content, which could influence choice of these medications. The half-life of an antipsychotic medication is another pharmacokinetic property that may be useful to consider in choosing among antipsychotic agents. Antipsychotic agents with a short halflife (see Statement 4, Tables 3 and 4) are more likely to require divided dosing in contrast to antipsychotic medications with a half-life that is closer to 24 hours. An oral antipsychotic medication with a longer half-life or an LAI may be preferable for patients who are prone to forget doses or who are intermittently nonadherent to treatment. Nevertheless, if an antipsychotic medication (or active metabolite) half-life is significantly longer than 24 hours, it is important to be aware that steady state may not be reached for some time. This can complicate interpreting the patient’s response to adjustments in doses in terms of therapeutic benefits and side effects. Additional caution may be needed when an antipsychotic medication with a long half-life is chosen for older individuals, for an individual who is taking other medications that may affect drug metabolism, or for individuals with renal or hepatic impairment. Older individuals often exhibit additional physiological changes relative to younger persons, including a reduced cardiac output (and concomitant reduction in renal and hepatic blood flow), reduced glomerular filtration rate, possible reduction in hepatic metabolism, and increased fat content. These changes may alter the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of medications and may also result in prolonged drug effects and greater sensitivity to medications, in terms of both therapeutic response and side effects (Kaiser 2015). Side-Effect Profile The side-effect profile of an antipsychotic agent is a significant factor in the choice of a specific medication (see Statement 4, Table 6). Often, a patient will express concerns about a particular side effect of medication (e.g., weight gain). A specific side effect (e.g., akathisia, weight gain, sedation, orthostatic hypotension, sexual dysfunction) may also have limited a patient’s treatment adherence or ability to function in the past. If a patient has a concomitant physical condition (e.g., diabetes, cardiac conduction abnormalities, a seizure disorder), choice of medication will need to consider the likelihood of exacerbating an existing health condition. Older individuals may be more sensitive to some medication side effects, such as tardive dyskinesia, orthostatic hypotension, or anticholinergic effects of medications. Thus, a medication that has a lower likelihood of these side effects might be preferred. In contrast, there may be circumstances in which a medication side effect may be helpful. For example, in a patient who is not sleeping well, a more sedating antipsychotic might be chosen and administered at bedtime. Regardless of the initial side effect–related considerations in the choice of an antipsychotic medication, it is important to continue to monitor for side effects as treatment proceeds and to have additional discussions with the patient about side effects as they relate to treatment preferences. 
